Keycloak 19034 transform wip google doc to community design proposal keycloak 7301 zero downtime upgrade of keycloak master (#1)
mhajas/keycloak-community: design/keycloak.x/storage-hot-rod.md

# Goals of this document

This document aims to address the following items:

* Follow up on no-downtime strategy presented in the [the Storage / Persistence layer proposal](storage-persistence.md)
* Present a way how to store and query data using Hot Rod Client and Remote Infinispan server so that we achieve the no-downtime requirements

# Non-Goals of this document

This document aims to _not_ address the following items:

* Provide a way how to replace the existing Infinispan layer
* Discuss design of caching or its impact on performance

# Technologies

- **[Infinispan](https://infinispan.org)** - Infinispan is a distributed in-memory key/value data store with optional schema. It can be used both as an embedded Java library and as a language-independent service accessed remotely over a variety of protocols. In this proposal, we will target Infinispan in the remote (client/server) scenario.
- **[Hot Rod](https://infinispan.org/docs/stable/titles/hotrod_java/hotrod_java.html)** - Hot Rod is a wire protocol that Infinispan clients use to talk to a remote grid. It is a binary, platform-independent protocol that was developed in the open as a part of Infinispan.

> - **[Protobuf buffers](https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/)** - Protocol Buffers (Protobuf) is a lightweight binary media type for structured data. In our case, it provides interoperability between the client (Keycloak-X store) and the Infinispan server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **[Protocol buffers](https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/)** - Protocol Buffers (Protobuf) is a lightweight binary media type for structured data. In our case, it provides interoperability between the client (Keycloak-X store) and the Infinispan server.
```

# Introduction

[The Storage / Persistence layer proposal](storage-persistence.md) suggests the following strategy to achieve 0-downtime upgrade store:

1. The store can read objects from the oldest ones to the current version

> 2. The store can read objects from the version following the current one

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. The store can read objects from one version following the current one
```

4. Number of schema changes should be kept at absolute minimum
5. Schema changes can be postponed and run at chosen time
   (even if that means running a degraded service)

A simple implementation of the following design can be found in this [pull request](https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak-playground/pull/11) into the keycloak-playground repository. This repository is a playground project that simplifies implementing and testing Keycloak-X-like no-downtime storage implementations.

# Data structure definition

For describing a structure of data that is stored in the Infinispan server there are Protobuf message definitions. Based on the message definition the Hot Rod client knows how to marshal and unmarshal the data that is sent/received to/from server. To make the Infinispan server able to query stored data, it is also necessary to share message definitions with the Infinispan server.

An example of a message definition is following:

```protobuf
package nodowntimeupgrade;

message InfinispanObjectEntity {
    required string entityVersion = 1;
    required string id = 2;
    optional string name = 3;
    optional string clientTemplateId = 4;
}
```

> This protobuf definition can be automatically generated from an annotated Java class definition. For setting Protobuf message-specific settings there are `@ProtoField` and `@ProtoDoc` (described in the indexing section) annotations.

Reviewer: `indexing section` should be a hyperlink and replaced by either same section name or `section on indexing`

    public int entityVersion = ModelVersion.VERSION_1.getVersion();

    @ProtoField(number = 2, required = true)
    public String id;

    @ProtoField(number = 3)
    @ProtoDoc("@Field(index = Index.YES, store = Store.YES, analyze = Analyze.YES, analyzer = @Analyzer(definition = \"keyword\"))")
    public String name;

    @ProtoField(number = 4)
    public String clientTemplateId;

}
```

Each field has its number. These numbers serve for identification during the marshaling/unmarshaling process.

## Changes in object representations

### Addition of new fields

The advantage of Protobuf definitions is that they are flexible. It is possible to add any number of fields on updates. For example, when we want to introduce a new field named `clientScopeId`, we can do it by adding

```java
@ProtoField(number = 5)
public String clientScopeId;
```

to the message definition and updating the definition in the Infinispan server and in the current `SerializationContext`. Then everything should work as before. It is also possible to read objects with new fields from the old storage version. The new field `clientScopeId` is skipped during unmarshaling.

### Changing field name/type

> It is possible to change field names or types. However, such changes can introduce backward incompatibility that we need to avoid due to no-downtime requirements. We can avoid breaking backward compatibility by doing updates in the following steps (in this example, we have the field `clientTemplateId` in the first object version (`entityVersion = 1`) and we want to replace it with `clientScopeId`; the migration path is following `clientScopeId = "template-" + clientTemplateId`):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is possible to change field names or types. However, such changes can introduce backward incompatibility that we need to avoid due to no-downtime requirements. We can avoid breaking backward compatibility by doing updates in the steps explained below.

 The steps will be illustrated on the following example: let us have an object definition containing field `clientTemplateId` in the first object version (`entityVersion = 1`). We want to replace it with `clientScopeId`. The migration path is prescribed as `clientScopeId = "template-" + clientTemplateId`).
```

---

**NOTE**

In this proposal, we distinguish between two types of version:

> * **Version of storage** - This corresponds to the version of source code and message definitions on the Keycloak server side; in other words an incremented storage version means there was a release of Keycloak. In a world where there is no change in Keycloak codebase other than changes in `InfinispanObjectEntity`, `entityVersion` corresponds to Keycloak version.

Reviewer: Storage version, specifically `entityVersion`, is independent of Keycloak versioning scheme. 

Storage structure (i.e. message definitions) might not change for a period of time that spans several Keycloak versions. Entity version corresponds to storage version.
Rationale: Maintaining entity version aligned with Keycloak version brings performance and maintenance cost. Upon every update, the version would update which boils down to need to update source code accordingly which is prone to forgetfullness. Furthermore, change in `entityVersion` when only Keycloak has been updated in the meantime, means that there will be multitude of objects updated just to bring the entityVersion to the current one, regardless if there was no other change, which costs performance.

Author: That is exactly what I was trying to describe by the above. I will rewrite it to be more understandable.

> * **Version of object** - This refers to the version of object in the storage (Infinispan server); in other words, this says what version of storage originally created the object in the store. The object version can be incremented by reading the old object from the store by newer storage, migrating it, and storing it back into the storage.

Reviewer: Is it the same as [logical object version](https://github.com/mhajas/keycloak-community/blob/KEYCLOAK-19034-Transform-WIP-google-doc-to-community-design-proposal-KEYCLOAK-7301-Zero-downtime-upgrade-of-keycloak-master/design/keycloak.x/storage-persistence.md#-version-compatibility-vc)? If so, please keep the naming consistent.

Author: I would say this is rather the physical representation. I will rewrite

Reviewer: I can see your point, and the naming seems to have introduced more issues than anticipated. 
It is a logical version of an object (as it is not tied to any other versioning scheme), but it can be also read as version of a logical object, which is not desired. Let's update the main spec then.

---

> 1. We update the old message defintion with `entityVersion = 2` (incrementing version of storage) so that it contains both `clientTemplateId` and `clientScopeId`

Reviewer: Tie it to the previous text, eg. by stating:
```
Let us assume that the storage version before update is `1`.
For the example above, the steps to change field `clientTemplateId` to `clientScopeId` is as follows:
```

> 2. Keycloak codebase that is using storage version 2 uses only the new field (`clientScopeId`). The deprecated `clientTemplateId` field is taken into account in three cases:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Keycloak codebase that is using storage version 2 only uses the new field (`clientScopeId`). The deprecated `clientTemplateId` field is taken into account in three cases:
```

>    1. When writing to the storage and `clientScopeId` value starts with `"template-"` prefix. In such case, `clientTemplateId` is written together with `clientScopeId`. This is to support the reading of objects version 2 by storage version 1. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   1. When writing to the storage and `clientScopeId` value starts with `"template-"` prefix. In such case,
   `clientTemplateId` is derived from `clientScopeId` by removing `"template-"` prefix and written
   together with `clientScopeId`. This is to support the reading of objects version 2 by storage version 1. 
```

   2. When reading an old object from the storage. The `clientTemplateId` field is read from the storage, and migrated to `clientScopeId`. This step is necessary read objects version 1 by storage version 2.

>    3. When querying objects, this will be discussed in the section around querying.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   3. When querying objects. This will be discussed in the section on querying.
```
Add hyperlink to that section

3. Then, there can be a new storage version `>= 3` which removes the deprecated `clientTemplateId`. Migrating to that storage version requires that all stored objects are migrated to object version `>= 2`. We will get back to the removal later in the proposal as it gets more complicated with regards to querying.

# Reading older versions of objects

> Each object contains `entityVersion` field that represents its object version (version of the storage that created it). To fulfill the requirements, we need to be able to read all older versions of objects. As described in the previous section, unmarshaling of objects is flexible enough to be able to read an older version when message definition contains all fields in unmarshalled stream. Moreover, unknown fields are ignored; though, we are losing the information that was stored there. In some cases, like the migration described in the previous section, we need to migrate one field to another. In this case, we need to check what version the read object was and migrate it when necessary. For example, this is how the migration works in the case of the previous migration path:

Reviewer: Too long a paragraph, please split.

```suggestion
Each object contains `entityVersion` field that represents its object version (version of the storage that created it). To fulfill the requirements, we need to be able to read all older versions of objects.

As described in the previous section, unmarshaling of objects is flexible enough to read an older version as long as the message definition declares all the fields used in the stream. Unknown fields are ignored though, so we may lose data stored there. Thus it is important not to remove the fields from the message definition until the documentation clearly states the migration path.

In some cases, like the migration described in the previous section, we need to migrate one field to another. Then we need to determine version of the read object and migrate it when necessary. For example, this is how the migration works in the case of the previous migration path:
```
Explain the migration in the end, whether it is in-memory in Keycloak, or in the stored representation, or in Infinispan, or something else..

```java
public class EntityMigrationToVersion3 extends ObjectEntityDelegate {

    public EntityMigrationToVersion3(InfinispanObjectEntity delegate) {
        super(delegate);
    }

    @Override
    public String getClientScopeId() {
        if (super.getClientScopeId() == null && super.getClientTemplateId() != null) {
            return "template-" + super.getClientTemplateId();
        }

        return super.getClientScopeId();
    }
}
```

> * `ObjectEntityDelegate` implements the same interface as `InfinispanObjectEntity`; it is used for overriding only some of the methods from the original object, in this case, the `getClientScopeId` method.

Reviewer: These items deserve some more intro.

- What is the `3` in `EntityMigrationToVersion3`? Is it arbitrary? Has it a meaning?
- Specify what _current version_ is
- Specify what you mean by _layers_

* All layers above this storage layer use only `clientScopeId`; the presence of the `clientTemplateId` field is hidden.
* Delegation object is created when `entityVersion` is lower than the current version.
* Too long chain of delegations can cause performance overhead. It can be solved by the migration of storage objects to a newer version (in the future might be solved by some scheduled tasks functionality)

# Querying objects

> Thanks to the fact, that schema is known on the Infinispan side, it is possible to query objects based on field names. It is also possible to create indices to speed up queries, more on that later in a separate section. Infinispan supports queries using [Ickle query language](https://infinispan.org/docs/stable/titles/developing/developing.html#creating_ickle_queries-querying). Here is an example, how the Ickle query looks like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Due to the fact that schema is known on the Infinispan side, it is possible to query objects based on field names. It is also possible to create indices to speed up queries, more on that later in a separate section. Infinispan supports queries using [Ickle query language](https://infinispan.org/docs/stable/titles/developing/developing.html#creating_ickle_queries-querying). Here is an example, how the Ickle query looks like:
```
\+ Hyperlink to the `separate section`

```java
// Remote Query, using protobuf
QueryFactory qf = org.infinispan.client.hotrod.Search.getQueryFactory(remoteCache);
Query<InfinispanObjectEntity> query = qf.create("from nodowntimeupgrade.InfinispanObjectEntity where name = 'searched-name'");
```

# Message definition changes and Ickle queries

> Ickle query with a field name that is unknown to the Infinispan server fails. Therefore, we need to be careful about updates and removals we perform in message definitions. On top of that, we need to make sure that queries are built with definition changes in mind. For this reason, it may be necessary to introduce some intermediate storage versions that provide the migration step on query level. Given the previous example where we replaced `clientTemplateId` with `clientScopeId`, the migration could be done in the following steps:

Reviewer: Should at least the first part of this paragraph be stressed in the `Changing field name/type` section?
Also, is this basically the same thing as explained in that section, just adjusted to the queries? If so, can it be referred or the text restructured to be clearly mutually relevant?

Author: Sorry, I am not following. Which part from `Changing field name/type` do you mean exactly? I didn't want to mix these two sections as requirements for updates after introducing queries are a little bit different, so I wanted the reader to have everything about queries in one place.

### Query in storage version 1

- Message definition in this version is the original one without `clientScopeId` field.
- It is possible to search by `clientTemplateId` without any additional query adjustments.
  ```
  FROM nodowntimeupgrade.InfinispanObjectEntity WHERE (clientTemplateId = 'desired-value')
  ```

### Query in storage version 2

- This is the intermediate version that uses both `clientTemplateId` and `clientScopeId`.

> - When doing a query it must count with the fact that the storage may contain objects version 1, that does not have `clientScopeId` defined.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- When doing a query it must count on the fact that the storage may contain objects version 1 which has no `clientScopeId` field defined.
```

> - The Keycloak service layer (or whatever layer is above storage layer) is searching only by `clientScopeId`, presence of `clientTemplateId` field is hidden to these layers.

Reviewer: By Keycloak service layer, do you mean [_Logical representation_](https://github.com/mhajas/keycloak-community/blob/KEYCLOAK-19034-Transform-WIP-google-doc-to-community-design-proposal-KEYCLOAK-7301-Zero-downtime-upgrade-of-keycloak-master/design/keycloak.x/storage-persistence.md#notions)?

Please no `(or whatever layer is above storage layer)` here :)

```suggestion
- Logical layer searches only by `clientScopeId` attribute. Presence of `clientTemplateId` field 
in the physical layer is hidden from the logical layer.
```

> - Store version 1 is able to return newly created objects of version 2 because these are backward compatible and contain `clientTemplateId` as well as `clientScopeId` when appropriate.

Reviewer: This should be rephrased. Store of version 1 is not able to return objects of version 2. Did you perhaps mean
```suggestion
- Store of version 1 is able to read objects created concurrently by store of version 2 because these are backward compatible and contain both `clientTemplateId` (for version 1) and `clientScopeId` (for version 2) fields.
```

> For this particular migration path (`clientScopeId = "template-" + clientTemplateId`) there are two scenarios how the resulting query looks like based on the searched value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this particular migration path (remember the rule: `clientScopeId = "template-" + clientTemplateId`), there are two scenarios what the resulting query looks like based on the searched value.
```

> **Searched value is _NOT_ prefixed with `"template-"**

Reviewer: Swap this and the next subsections, positive example should come first

No adjustment is needed as no object entity version 1 fulfills this search (`clientScopeId` without `"template-"` prefix is undefined on these objects).

```
FROM nodowntimeupgrade.InfinispanObjectEntity WHERE (clientScopeId = 'desired-value')
```

**Searched value is prefixed with `"template-"`**

In this case, there may be also some object version 1 that fulfills the given criteria; we need to take it into account.

```
FROM nodowntimeupgrade.InfinispanObjectEntity WHERE 
    (entityVersion >= 2 AND entityVersion <= 3 AND clientScopeId = 'template-desired-value') 
    OR
    (entityVersion < 2 AND c.clientTemplateId = 'desired-value')
```

Note the condition `entityVersion <= 3` comes from the no-downtime requirement that each version can read all previous versions, but only one following (`this.version + 1`).

### Query in storage version 3

* The message definition must still contain both `clientTemplateId` and `clientScopeId` (the old field needs to be present because storage version 2 sometimes includes it in Ickle queries).
* There is no migration of Ickle queries anymore, object entities version 1 are not returned from storage when searching by `clientScopeId`.

> * If the store detects, on startup, that there are some entities of version 1 in the storage, there is a **WARNING** printed that warns administrator of possible incomplete search results until she/he updates all objects to the version `>= 2`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If the store detects, on startup, that there are some entities of version 1 in the storage, there is a **WARNING** printed that warns administrator of possible incomplete search results until they update all objects to the version `>= 2`.
```

We use only `clientScopeId` in queries.

```
FROM nodowntimeupgrade.InfinispanObjectEntity WHERE (clientScopeId == 'desired-value')
```

> ### Query in storage in subsequent versions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Query in storage in version 4 and beyond
```

> No changes for this particular field in search queries. From the query perspective, it is possible to remove `clientTemplateId` from the message definition. On the other hand, if the administrator has no problem with incomplete results for this field, we can retain the presence of this field so that it is possible to read `clientTemplateId` and migrate it to `clientScopeId`. This can be decided for each migration individually.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
No changes for this particular field in search queries. From the query perspective, it is possible to remove `clientTemplateId` from the message definition. Note that this is a breaking change: Retaining presence of this field is still needed to be able to read old versions of the objects and migrate it to `clientScopeId`. The field definition should be kept as long as there may be a version smaller than 2 of the objects stored.
```

# Speeding up queries with indices

> Infinispan uses [`Apache Lucene`](http://lucene.apache.org/) technology to index values in caches. Entities that are indexed needs to be specified per cache configuration. Java annotation `@Protodoc` is used for setting which fields, for the particular entity, are indexed and also for specifying some additional indexing attributes.

Reviewer: Please rephrase the second sentence. Is it entity or field that is indexed?

```java
@ProtoDoc("@Field(index = Index.YES, store = Store.YES, analyze = Analyze.YES, analyzer = @Analyzer(definition = \"keyword\"))")
```

- **index** - To index or not to index, that is the switch.
- **store** - Index is stored in the host filesystem or the heap. Defaulting to the filesystem.
- **analyze** - Configures whether the value is searched as a value or as a full-text search. It is also possible to specify an [analyzer](https://infinispan.org/docs/stable/titles/developing/developing.html#analysis) used. 

# Case-insensitive queries

Often requirement in the Keycloak codebase is to search case-insensitively. For example, for email addresses we do not want to allow two accounts with emails `Admin@keycloak.org` and `admin@keycloak.org`. Even though, there is an operator `LIKE` in Ickle queries, it does not support case-insensitive search. For this reason, we need to have all fields with this requirement analyzed. 

> We need to be also cautios about choosing the correct analyzer. The default analyzer supports case-insensitive searches, however treats the words in the text as separate tokens. Therefore, it is not possible to search for strings with space in it. For example, given a group with name `My group name`, a search with string `My gr*` would not find any group with default analyzer. It should be possible to use `keyword` analyzer for searches like this, but it may have some other disadvantages. This needs to be decided for each index individually.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We need to be also cautious about choosing the correct analyzer. The default analyzer supports case-insensitive searches, however treats the words in the text as separate tokens. Therefore, it is not possible to search for strings with space in it. For example, given a group with name `My group name`, a search with string `My gr*` would not find any group with default analyzer. It should be possible to use `keyword` analyzer for searches like this, but it may have some other disadvantages. This needs to be decided for each index individually.
```

## Queries with analyzed fields

Ickle queries are [different](https://infinispan.org/docs/stable/titles/developing/developing.html#using_full_text_search) for analyzed fields. Operators used for non-analyzed fields do not work for full-text searches. We need to use `Phrase queries` or `Wildcard queries`. For example, the following case-insensitive query:

> `FROM UserEntity ue WHERE ue.email ILIKE "%@gmail.com"` is replaced with `FROM UserEntity ue WHERE ue.email : "*@gmail.com"`. For this reason, there are some restrictions about operator usage for analyzed fields. Supported operators are only ILIKE (case-insensitive wildcard search), EQ (phrase query without wildcards) and NE (negated EQ). This needs to be documented somewhere.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`FROM UserEntity ue WHERE ue.email ILIKE "%@gmail.com"` is replaced with `FROM UserEntity ue WHERE ue.email : "*@gmail.com"`. For this reason, there are some restrictions on operator usage for analyzed fields. Supported operators are only ILIKE (case-insensitive wildcard search), EQ (phrase query without wildcards) and NE (negated EQ). The set of fields (like e-mail above) that are limited by the available operators should be clearly documented.
```

> # Transactional layer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Transactions
```

> The goal of the transactional layer is to fulfill the following items:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Keycloak map transaction ensures that:
```

1. The transaction layer must keep track of all objects returned from the storage; all changes done to tracked objects are propagated to the Infinispan server in the commit phase

> 2. To save network utilization, the transactional layer can decide whether performed changes were meaningful; non-meaningful changes are not propagated to the Infinispan server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. To save network utilization, the transaction should be able to decide whether there were any changes worth saving performed; some changes may be delayed or even irrelevant for the stored state in Infinispan server and should be ignored upon commit.
```

- **NON_DURABLE_XA** - `RemoteCache` interacts with the `TransactionManager` using [`XAResource`](https://docs.oracle.com/javaee/7/api/javax/transaction/xa/XAResource.html) without possibility of [recovery](https://infinispan.org/docs/stable/titles/developing/developing.html#tx_recovery).
- **FULL_XA** - `RemoteCache` interacts with the `TransactionManager` using [`XAResource`](https://docs.oracle.com/javaee/7/api/javax/transaction/xa/XAResource.html) with the possibility of recovery. Should be avoided due to the [documentation note](https://infinispan.org/docs/stable/titles/hotrod_java/hotrod_java.html#hr_transactions_config_server) about performance degradation.

Based on the above, **NON_DURABLE_XA** seems to be the best option to use given the requirements.

# Infinispan Initialization

## Remote caches

Configuration of the remote caches will be stored declaratively in a xml file. The caches can be created either:

> * by a user when starting the Infinispan server using the provided configuration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Preferrably by a user when starting the Infinispan server using the provided configuration
```

> * by Keycloak which will check if the caches exist on the Infinispan server during the startup and if not, it will create them. However some users may want to tweak the configuration based on their special needs in which case they will create the caches themselves.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* For developers, by Keycloak which will check if the caches exist on the Infinispan server during the startup and if not, it will create them. However some users may want to tweak the configuration based on their special needs in which case they will create the caches themselves.
```

Example of a remote cache configuration:
```
<infinispan>
   <cache-container>
       ...

>        <distributed-cache name="clients" mode="SYNC">

Reviewer: Is this a remote cache configuration?

Author: Yes, this xml can be used by creating a cache using `ConfigurationBuilder`  as follows:
```java
configurationBuilder.remoteCache("clients").configurationURI(xmlFileUri);
```

           <encoding media-type="application/x-protostream"/>
           <locking isolation="REPEATABLE_READ"/>
           <transaction mode="NON_XA"/>
       </distributed-cache>
	...
   </cache-container>
</infinispan>
```

Each map storage type (clients, users, ...) will have a separate remote cache. The exact configuration of caches to be decided based on the testing. 

## Protobuf schema

> It’s required to register protobuf schema definition to the Infinispan server for all entities which will be stored in the caches. We consider two options:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is required to register protobuf schema definition to the Infinispan server for all entities which will be stored in the caches. We consider two options:
```

> * register Protobus schemas automatically during the startup by adding them to `___protobuf_metadata` cache. We need to make sure that an old schema won’t override a newer schema if a pod restarts. This is the preferred option.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* register Protobuf schemata automatically during the startup by adding them to `___protobuf_metadata` cache. We need to make sure that an old schema won’t override a newer schema if a pod restarts. This is the preferred option.
```

> * `protostream-processor` dependency processes Java annotations in your classes at compile time to generate Protobuf schemas. These schemas then can be added to the Infinispan server by a user via CLI/REST.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `protostream-processor` dependency processes Java annotations in the classes at compile time to generate Protobuf schemata. These schemata then can be added to the Infinispan server by a user via CLI/REST.
```
